This lecture is about the data.table
package which is a often faster more
memory efficient version of the data
frames that you're commonly using when
your analyzing data NR.
So the data.table inherits
from a data frame so
all functions that accept that
data.frame should work on data.table.
And there's a pretty steady set of
updates to data that table in case it
doesn't work.
It's written in C so
it can be much, much faster than some of
the functions that are done in data.frame.
It's much, much faster at subsetting,
grouping variables, and
updating variables than data
frames are but it requires you
to learn a little bit of a new syntax so
there's a little bit of a learning curve.
So if we load the data.table package
we can create a data frame like this.
This is the usual way that
we create a data frame.
And if we look at that we see it has,
you know, three variables, x, y,
and z stored in each of the columns.
And we can also create a data table, and
we create it in exactly the same way.
And so we just pass it the arguments for
the variables that we want to create.
And if you look at the top of
that data frame you see it looks
very similar to what you would expect
if you had created a data frame.
So one thing that you can do is see all
of that data that tables in memory, so
you do that with the tables command.
It has an s at the end,
it's different than the table command.
And so what it'll tell you is the name
of the data table, how many rows,
how many megabytes how many columns and
if there's a key.
And so I'll talk a little bit more
about what I mean by a key in a minute.
So the first thing that you might want
to be able to do is subset rows and
so just like with.
Subsetting the rows in the data frame.
You can subset with the first spot in
the square brackets, before the comma.
You can also subset just like you did
rows, like you did with the data frame,
in a similar way,
by accessing a particular element, y, and
looking at only the values
where y is equal to a.
One thing that is a little bit different
is when you subset with only one index,
it subsets based on the rows.
So if I do this data table,
I take the second or third element,
that's going to take the second and third
rows that come out of that data table.
What happens when you
try to subset columns,
if you just try to subset columns
the way you're used to in data frames,
this is where they really diverge
data table and data frame.
It's not actually trying to subset
the columns using the same subsetting
function that happens with data frame,
it does something a little bit different.
And so what it's using is expressions to
be able to summarize the data in various,
different ways.
So, any expression is
some set of statements that
are between curly brackets, like this.
So here's an example of an statement
that says print ten and
then five, and so
this actually prints out ten.
But when you tell k to print, it just
prints out the variable five at the end.
So, this will come into a play in a minute
when we try to use expressions to
summarize data sets.
So for example, you can, instead of
putting an index here in the second
part of the brackets, you can actually
pass a list of functions that you want
to perform where the functions are applied
to variables named by columns.
So here x is one of the variables
in the data table and
z is one of the variables
in the data table.
And note we don't have to use parentheses,
or sorry, quotation marks.
It will just recognize what the variables.
That you're trying to use R.
And so, this will report the mean of
the x values and the sum of the z values.
You can also do that to perform
pretty much any function.
You can say, for example,
get a table of the y values.
And so, anytime you pass a list
into this second argument,
it'll perform those functions and
return the values.
That's good for summarizing data.
Another thing that it does very fast and
very memory efficiently
is to add a new column.
So suppose you wanted to add a new column
to your data table where a new column was
equal to this z variable squared
you can use this command where it's
colon equals to add that
variable w to the data table.
And the nice thing is is usually when
you're adding a new variable to a data
frame, R will copy over the entire data
frame and add a new variable to it,
so you get two copies of
the the data frame and memory.
So when dealing with big data sets,
this is obviously going to
cause lots of memory problems,
which you don't have with data table
because a new copy isn't being created.
You have to be a little bit
careful with that though, so
suppose we set a second data table to
be assigned to the first data table.
And then we make a change
to the first data table.
Because a copy hasn't been made,
if we go back and
look at the first data table,
obviously we've made a change to that,
we've changed the Y variable
to be all equal to's.
But the second data table was assigned
to be the first data table and
since a copy wasn't made, we've actually
changed data table two as well.
So you have to be able to, if you're
trying to create a copy you have to
explicitly do that with the copy function.
So if you use the function copy you'd
be able to copy the data table over.
So the next thing that you can do is
you can actually perform multiple step
functions to create new variables.
So for example here I have an expression.
See it starts with the curly bracket and
it ends with a curly bracket.
And each statement is
followed by a semi-colon.
So the first statement is I'm going
to assign to the temporary variable,
the values of X plus Z, and
then I'm going to take the log base two
of that temporary variable plus five.
And so as you remember, the last
thing that gets returned from this
expression in the evaluation
of this last statement.
And so what ends up happening is
this variable m will be assigned to be
log base two of x plus z plus five.
So those sorts of multi step
operations can be handled
very easily with data table.
You can also do plyr like operations.
So for example we can add to this
data table a variable like A which is
created in zero,
equal to true when X is greater than
zero and false when X is less than zero.
So now we have a binary value
A that we can work with.
So suppose we want to summarize
another variable by the cases where
when X is greater than 0 versus
the cases where X is less than 0.
So for
example we can take the mean of X + W and
we can do it grouped by a variable A.
And so what that's gonna do is it's gonna
take the mean of X plus W when A is equal
to true, and it's gonna place that mean
in all the rows where A is equal to true.
Then it's gonna take the mean of X
plus W where A is equal to false.
And place that mean in all the rows
where A is equal to false.
So it creates a new variable that's
equal to the aggregated mean,
aggregated over the variable
that you used by 4.
There's some special variables and
data table that allow you to
do something's really fast.
So one is a .N is
an integer linked one and
it's a containment number of times that
a particular group appears and so for
example if I created data
table that has a large
number of As, Bs, and Cs in it,
so about 100,000 A B and Cs.
Then what I can do is,
if I want to count the number
of times each of those letters
appear I can use data table,
dot N, and then grouped by the X variable.
And then what that will
do is it will count,
dot N is just count the number of
times grouped by the X variable.
It does that very fast as opposed
to the equivalent operation,
which is just doing that
table of DT dollar sign X.
A unique aspect of data tables
is that they have keys,
so if you set the key,
it's possible to subset and
sort a data table much more rapidly than
you would be able to do with a data frame.
Here, I'm going to create a data table,
and it's going to have a variable X.
And it's gonna have a variable Y and
I'm gonna set the key for
the data table to be the variable X.
Then if I want a subset on
the basis of x or if I put in
quoted a here, it knows to go and
look in the key, and the key is x, and
it very quickly subsets the data to only
the values of x that are equal to a.
You can also use keys to facilitate
joints between data tables so for
example here I've created two data
tables where they have a variable X and
a variable Y and in this case
the second data table has a variable Z.
And so I can set the key in
both cases to be equal to x, so
the same key for both data tables.
And then I can merge them together.
This is actually quite a bit faster
than merging with the data frame
as long as you have the same key for
both data tables.
It can be very fast.
It can also be advantageous to use data
tables if you want to be able to read
things fast from the disk.
So here I've created a big data frames.
So it's a data frame with two
very large variables in it.
And then I set up a temporary file
with this command right here.
And I write our big data
frame apps that file.
Then I'm going to time how long it takes
to read it in using the fread command.
The fread command could be
applied to reading data tables,
just like basically a drop-in substitute
for read.table tab separated files.
And so
you can see it takes about .32 seconds.
If I tried to do that same operation, if I
just tried to read that table that file,
it would come in quite a bit slower,
well a little more than ten times
slower to be able to read that file in.
So it's actually much faster to read
files with data, data.table as well.
To summarize data table
can be both faster and
more memory efficient than data frames.
Although it requires you to learn
a little bit of use syntax, and
sometimes to be a little bit careful
in terms of copying over data tables.
The latest developments can be found on
the development version of the package.
Which can be found at
this website right here.
They've already started to develop
a melt like operations and
decast like operations for
data tables and they're gonna continually
update that packages it's a very
rapidly developing package.
And then this website here is very nice
cause it gives you comprehensive-ish
list of all the differences between
data.table and data frames.
And so, that would be very useful
if you're transitioning from
using data frames to using data table.
The notes that I've used today are very
largely based on the notes that
Raphael Gottardo has put up here on
GitHub, and they were originally from
Kevin Ushey, and I think that
both of them deserve credit for
the excellent notes that I've largely
copied here for this lecture.